So we've already looked a little bit at
processes cuz I showed you the PS AUX,
right?
And I showed you all the running
processes on a computer.
Now, we're gonna get a little
bit more in depth into that.
So just like everything
is a file in Linux,
everything that's running is a process.
And this might not be too unfamiliar for
you if you've run Windows or
Mac before because you have your process
manager or your application monitor,
I think is what it's called in Mac, right?
It's that same idea.
And that's what we're doing here every
time that we say PS here in Linux.
We're saying, if you type ps,
which I cannot remember what
that actually stands for.
I think I have it in here,
process something or
other Anyway, it doesn't matter.
So if you run just ps,
that's going to look at what just
you as Ubuntu is currently running.
And right now, I'm not running anything,
I'm running just bash, and then the ps
itself, like the actual command that I
ran to find what processes are running.
So let's go ahead and run one.
There's another command here called sleep
and all it does is wait, just waits for
that amount of time.
So if I say sleep 1, it'll wait for
a second and that's done.
If I say sleep 2, waits for
two seconds and then it's done.
So if I say sleep 10 and
then if I put an ampersand,
which means run in the background,
so if I put sleep 10 and
then I say ps immediately, you'll see
that that sleep command comes up, right?
That's because I, Ubuntu,
spawned the process that's doing sleep and
then it's gonna run.
And if I run this again after 10 seconds,
it's gonna say, hey,
by the way since you last ran me,
this one finished.
And now,
I'm just back to the two commands.
So, That's what that ends up doing.
Let's do a sleep 100 in the background,
that's too long.
What happens if I wanna kill,
oops, not that one ps.
We saw how to do this before.
So this is a PID right here, this PID.
This stands for
process ID as you might imagine and
it's how I can refer to
processes in flight.
If I wanted to kill that,
if you remember kill- 9 or
kill- SIGKILL 1783 right there.
Now, if I go back and look at that again,
you can see here that
the process was killed.
So that's why these PIDs will end up
being really useful to how you can refer
to processes that are currently in flight.
Okay, so
that's what just ps by itself does.
Now, you notice that by just muscle
memory, I almost always put aux because
normally, I don't care what I, the user,
am running, I care what everybody's using.
So that's what that aux
does is it just tells me,
here's everything that everyone
on the system is running.
And you can see here Ubuntu
has these ones down here,
roots running some stuff,
roots running some other stuff, systemd.
They're all running various
different things and
you can see here all the various
different processes running.
So this ends up being usually
such a long list that I'll
either do ps aux and
you can actually see that in the less.
And you can scroll through
here using less like this or
you'll see me often doing the grep
stuff that we're talking about earlier.
So grep ps, right?
And then I can find just the thing
that I'm looking for there.
So that's how I end up usually
navigating around this process list.
All right, let's talk about background and
foreground.
So let's say I have a process that's gonna
be running a really long time, right?
Like I'm gonna put in here sleep 1000.
But you could imagine this maybe this
is like a thing that goes through and
processes all of your images, right?
That can take a really long time or maybe
you're running a machine learning model
and it has to run and do all that
backward propagation that takes forever.
So I ran this process sleep 1000.
I don't wanna sit here and wait for
1000 seconds for this to finish.
So what I can actually do
is I can do Ctrl z and
what that does is it stops the process and
it puts me back into my interactive shell.
But what you can actually
do is I can say jobs, And
you can see here that
I have this one here.
It's been stopped sleep 1000.
And I can actually say bg 1,
which refers to this one right here.
And what this actually does is it
resumes the process in the background.
So if I look here at jobs again, you can
see the sleep 1000 is actually running in
the background, but
I'm still in my interactive shell.
So I don't actually have to wait for it.
This is really essential for me because
I do like a lot of long-running jobs,
like npm install, for example, right?
If you run npm install,
that can end up taking several minutes and
I sure as hell am either gonna go joust
like that other xkcd comic if nmp
is installing or
my machine code is compiling.
Or I can just have it run in the
background and not have to wait for it.
And if you're curious what's happening,
I can say jobs again,
you can see this is running.
And I can say fg, which stands for
foreground 1, and this will actually put
me back into the process and
I'll resume watching the output.
And same thing, Ctrl z,
jobs 1, or bg 1 rather,
and this will resume it in the background.
So it's how you can move processes
to the background or the foreground.
Again, that's very helpful to me because
I don't always wanna sit there and
wait for it.
Now, something that I'm not talking about
that I know someone on the stream is
probably thinking about right now is,
why aren't you teaching me tmx or screen?
So there's two things, there's two other
programs out there that I'm not gonna
teach you today because I don't
end up using them a whole lot.
One is called screen,
which allows you to have basically
multiple shells within one session, right?
So I can actually say switch from this one
that I'm looking at right now to switch to
like basically another window,
but it's not a window,
it's within the terminal itself.
And that's what screen
will allow to do for you.
I sometimes use screen,
but usually not very much.
But the nice thing about screen is it
allows me to run things in the background
and switch to another shell or
another window basically.
I'll let you look it up if
you're interested in doing that.
And then if you wanna get really advanced,
there's one called tmux,
which allows you to
basically split screens and
have one running on one side and
one running on another.
You can split in multiple ways,
do all this kind of stuff.
Again, I don't end up using it
because I used to use it a lot and
I had some problems with it
that some commands would run
slightly different inside of tmux
than they would outside of tmux.
And once I had that problem, I was like,
I am never using this again, this was such
a weird bug that I lost a day or two that
I just quit cold turkey on using tmux.
So I'm sure I'm offending someone who
might say that their favorite program is
probably tmux, but I'm okay with that.
It's probably the same crowd that's upset
that I work for vs code and not on vi.
So, Anyway,
if you're not gonna use screen and
you're not gonna use tmux, then go ahead
and use foreground and background.
One thing that does bear mentioning,
So let's see,
jobs, there's a way you can
display the pid as well, I think.
Yeah, jobs- l.
So I can see here, this is 1793.
I can now just come in here and
say kill- 9 1793 if I just wanna
kill that job in the background.
If I say jobs now, then it'll tell
you it's like that was killed.
So that's how you would kill it as well.
This is more than sufficient for my needs.
You can learn screen and you can tmux,
but jobs works really well.
Cool, any questions about that,
about processes, or pids, or jobs, or
foregrounds, and backgrounds?
Cool, so yeah,
that was one thing I was gonna mention.
If you put that ampersand on there, it
automatically sends it to the background.
So if I say asleep 1000, And
I put that ampersand,
that just sends it to the background.
The one thing to be careful with that is
it doesn't necessarily send the output to
the background.
So if you're gonna do that, you're gonna
have to redirect the output, right?
But we didn't feel like with the,
let's kill that.
What you would have to
do here is like one or
just send that all to output.txt and
then do that.
Otherwise, you're gonna still get
the output to your screen despite the fact
that your screen is still
gonna be interactive.
So here, I can say jobs- l and
I can just kill- 9 1796,
I think I can kill 1797 sometimes, 1797.
Cool, and those are both killed.